---
title: 'Including mature sequences on miRNA structural alignments'
date: 2023-04-11
permalink: /posts/2023/04/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - microRNA
  - mature annotation
  - secondary structure
  - alignments
---

This is a way to compare current miRNA structural alignments from RFAM v.14.9 and the 
structural alignments calculated with the inclusion of the annotated mature region from miRBase.
The starting point is the relation between RFAM, miRBase and RNACentral.

I've created an automatic pipeline to get the updated information from those databases. Using `posgresql` I was able to retrieve the data from the current RNACentral version (v.22) and RFAM (v.14.9). From RFAM I
retrieved all miRNA families and all miRNA families that contained at least one
metazoan sequence in their alignment. I used `wget` to retrieve their
corresponding fasta sequences for each 'metazoan' model.
Key files are: the mapping between RNACentral and RFAM and the rfamseq file. The relation is
reported on the file `rnacentral_matches.txt` together with the `rfamseq.txt` file, both retrieved using `wget`:

```bash
wget ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/Rfam/CURRENT/database_files/rnacentral_matches.txt.gz
wget https://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/Rfam/CURRENT/database_files/rfamseq.txt.gz
```

From `miRBase` (v.22.1), the files `harpin.fa` and `mature.fa` are fetched using `wget`:

```bash
wget https://mirbase.org/ftp/CURRENT/hairpin.fa.gz
wget https://mirbase.org/ftp/CURRENT/mature.fa.gz
```

The `MirGeneDB` (v.2.1) needs additional steps to get their annotations, in GFF format, namely directly
from their [website](https://mirgenedb.org/):

```bash
wget https://mirgenedb.org/gff/ALL?sort=pos&all=1
mv ALL\?sort\=pos\&all\=1 ALL.gff
```

Based on the posgresql service from RNAcentral, I calculated the representation
of the databases along all databases. In this case, the idea is to annotate the
RFAM mature sequences, based on this provided link. In this case, re-calculate these
relations based on the database table and run MIRfix to re-build the alignments. 
In this case, run:

```bash
cd GetRelationsRFAOthers/
./obtain_statisticsV3.sh
```

It will generate the table: relations_RFAM_vs_all_db.txt, which held all RFAM sequences 
related with another databases. The final list should be retrieved with:

```bash
./get_relations_mirbase_rfam.sh
```

It will generate the final table: final_RFAM_relations_list.txt

General ideas about the mature position and prediction
======
By this way, the idea is to have the fasta sequences provided by RFAM. Correlating
the reported accession numbers with the relationship table, results in a split of the
provided RFAM sequences in 2 groups:
one_to_one : which represents those ones that have a representation along RFAM and miRBase.
one_to_many: Candidates represented only in RFAM alignments.
Inside the one_to_one group, exists a set of mature sequences already annotated on miRBase,
and should be used together with MIRfix to correct the reported mature(s) positions.
Once those ones are corrected and updated in terms of positions, is possible to annotate 
the other one_to_many set of sequences. Before that, I realised that RFAM seed aligments have
been made from a curated set of sequences (seed) which are reported in the database file:
seed_region_RFAM14.txt
Then, before include the one_to_many sequences, a previous filter step will be performed in
order to attach only those sequences that are previously classified as seed by RFAM.
Those means that the final multiple sequences file that will be submitted to MIRfix is composed
by:
- Mature position corrected one_to_one sequences as sequences with annotated matures from miRBase.
- One_to_many sequences, which are previously classified as seed. This set of sequences will be
the target sequences which MIRfix will annotate the correct position of the best mature sequence. 
The output files from this methodology are the multiple Stockholm alignment and the positions 
of the mature(s) sequences along all of the seed sequences from the Covariance Model. At the end,
sequences that are not included into the alignment will be discarted. 


miRNAture: correction of the RFAM sequences
-----
Based on the complete fasta sequences from RFAM v14.1, located on: 

`/scr/k70san/bogota_unal/miRNAsTunicata/miRNAture/Code/RFAM_Processing/Data/RFAM14-1Fasta`

is possible to execute the 3 stages of the pipeline: create, execute and final.
In this case, the first one is create the required files to run MIRFix.
then, to execute all please run:

`./execute_correction_RFAM_miRNA.sh`
